RFC-0027: PyTorch DistributedTensor (#44)
pytorch/rfcs: RFC-0027-PyTorch-Distributed-Tensor.md

# RFC: PyTorch DistributedTensor

> We proposed distributed tensor primitives to allow easier distributed computation authoring in SPMD manner, the primitives are simple but powerful to express tensor distributions with both sharding and replication strategies. This could empower native PyTorch Tensor Parallelism and advanced parallelism explorations. For example, to shard a big tensor across devices with 3 lines of code:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We propose distributed tensor primitives to allow easier distributed computation authoring in SPMD(Single Program Multiple Devices) paradigm. The primitives are simple but powerful when used to express tensor distributions with both sharding and replication parallelism strategies. This could empower native Tensor parallelism among other advanced parallelism explorations. For example, to shard a big tensor across devices with 3 lines of code:
```

```python
import torch  
from torch.distributed import DeviceMesh, Shard, distribute_tensor  
  

> mesh = DeviceMesh("cuda", list(range(world_size)))  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Create a mesh topology with the available devices.
mesh = DeviceMesh("cuda", list(range(world_size)))  
```

big_tensor = torch.randn(100000, 88)  

> distribute_tensor(big_tensor, mesh, [Shard(dim=0)])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Shard this tensor over the mesh by sharding `big_tensor`'s 0th dimension over the 0th dimension of `mesh`.
distribute_tensor(big_tensor, mesh, [Shard(dim=0)])
```

```

> To see a complete design doc for this proposal, please refer to https://docs.google.com/document/d/1nFeJ8NSFNhNlCkNgWK31ZGRqm1L9rd0i_XN_RprphaI/edit#heading=h.6sovjqv9jiqn

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To see a complete design doc for this proposal, please refer to this [doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1nFeJ8NSFNhNlCkNgWK31ZGRqm1L9rd0i_XN_RprphaI/edit#heading=h.6sovjqv9jiqn)
```

## Motivation

> Today there are mainly three ways to scale up distributed training: Data Parallel, Tensor Parallel and Pipeline Parallel. Each of them works on a separate dimension where solutions have been built independently (i.e. PyTorch DDP, FSDP, ShardedTensor, PiPPy, etc.). When training really large models, users would like to use these technologies together (i.e. 3-D Parallelism), while the interoperability of the existing solutions are not great and often hard to use (i.e. users might want arbitrary combinations of the data parallel, tensor parallel and pipeline parallel). This is becoming an issue for users and one of the biggest reasons is that there’s no common abstractions that build the bridge between different parallel strategies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Today there are mainly three ways to scale up distributed training: Data Parallel, Tensor Parallel and Pipeline Parallel. Each of them works on a separate dimension where solutions have been built independently (i.e. PyTorch DDP, FSDP, ShardedTensor, PiPPy, etc.). When training really large models, users would like to use these technologies together (i.e. 3-D Parallelism), while the interoperability of the existing solutions are not great and often hard to use (i.e. users might want arbitrary combinations of the data parallel, tensor parallel and pipeline parallel). This is becoming an issue for users and one of the biggest reasons is that there’s no common abstractions that build the bridge between different parallelism strategies.
```

> An ideal scenario is that users could just build their models like in a single node/device, without worrying about how to do distributed training in a cluster, and our solutions could help them run distributed training in an efficient manner. For example, researchers just need to build their big transformer model, and PyTorch Distributed automatically figures out how to split the model and run pipeline parallel across different nodes, how to run data parallel and tensor parallel within each node. In order to achieve this, we need to translate a single device model into a distributed version and train/serve it with our runtime. To represent the distributed version of the model and facilitate translations, we need some common abstractions to represent distribution and computation.

Reviewer: nit: This seems to be describing the compiler approach and we can maybe skip this according to me.

> There're many recent works that working on tensor level parallelism to provide common abstractions, see the `Related Works` in the last section for more details. Inspired by [GSPMD](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2105.04663.pdf), [Oneflow](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2110.15032.pdf) and [TF’s DTensor](https://www.tensorflow.org/guide/dtensor_overview), we introduce a DistributedTensor concept to represent generic data distributions across hosts. DistributedTensor is the next evolution of ShardedTensor and provides basic abstractions to distribute storage and compute. It serves as one of the basic building blocks for distributed program translations and describes the layout of a distributed training program. With the DistributedTensor abstraction, we can build different parallelism strategies in a easy way, including generic tensor parallelism, or DDP/FSDP parallelism patterns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There're many recent works that working on tensor level parallelism to provide common abstractions, see the `Related Works` in the last section for more details. Inspired by [GSPMD](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2105.04663.pdf), [Oneflow](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2110.15032.pdf) and [TF’s DTensor](https://www.tensorflow.org/guide/dtensor_overview), we introduce a DistributedTensor concept to represent generic data distributions across hosts. DistributedTensor is the next evolution of ShardedTensor and provides basic abstractions to distribute storage and compute. It serves as one of the basic building blocks for distributed program translations and describes the layout of a distributed training program. With the DistributedTensor abstraction, we can seamlessly build parallelism strategies such as tensor parallelism, DDP and FSDP.
```

## Value Propsition

> The primary value of DistributedTensor includes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DistributedTensor primarily:
```

> -   Offers a uniform way to save/load state dict during checkpointing, even when there’re complex data distribution strategies

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Offers a uniform way to save/load state dict during checkpointing, even when there’re complex data distribution strategies such as combing tensor parallelism with parameter sharding in FSDP.
```

> -   DistributedTensor could natively offer Tensor Parallelism solution in eager mode, just like our current ShardedTensor solution. Moreover, it gives additional flexibility for advanced users who want to mix sharding and replication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Could natively offer Tensor Parallelism solution in eager mode, just like our current ShardedTensor solution. Moreover, it gives additional flexibility for advanced users who want to mix sharding and replication.
```

> -   DistributedTensor could be used as a basic building block of a compiler based solution to do distributed training    

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Could be used as a basic building block of a compiler based solution to do distributed training    
```

> -   DistributedTensor could act as a SPMD programming model entry point for ML System Engineers, providing good UX to mix up different types of parallelism.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Could act as a SPMD programming model entry point for ML System Engineers, providing good UX to mix up different types of parallelism.
```

Reviewer: The last 2 points could be combined to be one point. WDYT?

> ## PyTorch Distributed Tensor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## PyTorch DistributedTensor
```

### DistributedTensor API

> We offer both lower level DistributedTensor API and module level API to create nn.Module with “distributed” parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We offer both a lower level DistributedTensor API and a module level API to create a `nn.Module` with “distributed” parameters.
```

#### Basic DistributedTensor API Examples

> Here are some basic DistributedTensor level API examples that showcase: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here are some basic DistributedTensor API examples that showcase: 
```

> 1.  How to construct a DistributedTensor directly, to represent different types of sharding, replication, sharding + replication

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. How to construct a DistributedTensor directly, to represent different types of sharding, replication, sharding + replication strategies.
```

> 2. How to create DistributedTensor from a local torch.Tensor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. How to create DistributedTensor from a local `torch.Tensor`.
```

> 3. How to “reshard” an existing DistributedTensor to a different DistributedTensor with different placement strategy, or world size.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. How to “reshard” an existing DistributedTensor to a different DistributedTensor with modified placement strategy or world size.
```

```python
import torch  
import torch.distributed as distributed  
from torch.distributed import DTensor, DeviceMesh, Shard, Replicate, distribute_module  
  
# construct a device mesh with available devices (multi-host or single host)  
device_mesh = DeviceMesh(device_type="cuda", [0, 1, 2, 3])  
# if we want to do row-wise sharding  
rowwise_placement=[Shard(0)]  
# if we want to do col-wise sharding  
colwise_placement=[Shard(1)]  
# distributed tensor returned will be sharded across the dimension specified in placements  

> distributed.empty((8, 12), device_mesh=device_mesh, placements=rowwise_placement)  

Reviewer: is `distributed.empty` a new API that we are proposing over `torch.empty`?

  
# if we want to do replication across a certain device list  
replica_placement = [Replicate()]  
# distributed tensor will be replicated to all four GPUs.  
distributed.empty((8, 12), device_mesh=device_mesh, placements=replica_placement)  
  
# if we want to distributed a tensor with both replication and sharding  
device_mesh = DeviceMesh(device_type="cuda", [[0, 1], [2, 3]])  
# replicate across the first dimension of device mesh, then sharding on the second dimension of device mesh  
spec=[Replicate(), Shard(0)]  
distributed.empty((8, 8), device_mesh=device_mesh, placements=spec)  
  
# create a DistributedTensor that shards on dim 0, from a local torch.Tensor  
local_tensor = torch.randn((8, 8), requires_grad=True)  

> rowwise_tensor = DTensor.from_local(local_tensor, device_mesh, rowwise_placement)  

Reviewer: Can we add a comment about how `from_local` is different from calling DTensor(torch.empty())?

```python
def distribute_tensor(tensor: torch.Tensor, device_mesh: DeviceMesh=None, placements: List[Placement]=None):  
    '''
    distribute the tensor according to device_mesh and placements, `tensor` could be a "meta" tensor.  
    '''  
  
def distribute_module(  
    module: nn.Module,  
    device_mesh: DeviceMesh=None,  
    partition_fn: Callable[str, nn.Module]=None,  
    input_fn: Callable[torch.Tensor]=None,  
    output_fn: Callable[torch.Tensor]=None,  
):  
    '''  
    This function converts all module parameters to distributed tensor parameters according to the `partition_fn` specified.  
    It could also control the input/output of the module by specifying the `input_fn` and `output_fn`. 
    '''
```

#### High level API examples:

```python 
def MyModule(nn.Module):  
    def __init__(self):  
        super.__init__()  
        self.fc1 = nn.Linear(8, 8)  
        self.fc2 = nn.Linear(8, 8)  
        self.relu = nn.ReLU()  
     
    def forward(self, input):  
        return self.relu(self.fc1(input) + self.fc2(input))  
  
def shard_params(mod_name, mod):  

>     def to_dist_tensor(t): return distribute_tensor(t, mesh, rowwise_placement)  

Reviewer: Do `mesh` and `rowwise_placement` need to be input to `shard_params`?

Author: `partition_fn` should have a fixed param signature list, I think `mesh` and `placements` are sth user can construct inside the `shard_params` function. I'll update it accordingly.

-  OneFlow is building up their own solution of the “GlobalTensor” concept, which is a variant form of GSPMD sharding, allowing users to explore different parallel strategies with GlobalTensor. 
-  OneFlow also has three types of tensor, but they are slightly different from GSPMD: “split”, “broadcast”, and “partial sum”. They don’t use partially tiled and instead have a concept of partial sum to partition the values.

TensorFlow DTensor:
-   [DTensor Concepts](https://www.tensorflow.org/guide/dtensor_overview) is an extension of TensorFlow synchronous distributed training. its sharding API, supported features and its compilation passes with MLIR.
-   DTensor also allows sharding and replication on an n-d mesh like device network.
-   DTensor implements MLIR passes to do propagation and operator implementations.

There are also several cutting edge research fields that embeds tensor sharding as part of the system, i.e. [Megatron-LM](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1909.08053.pdf) for tensor parallelism on Transformer based models. [DeepSpeed](https://github.com/microsoft/DeepSpeed) for training large scale models with different optimization techniques on top of tensor sharding.

> In PyTorch, we have existing [ShardedTensor](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1WEjwKYv022rc1lSrYcNWh3Xjx9fJC7zsrTKTg0wbPj0/edit?usp=sharing) work in the prototype stage, which introduces basic PyTorch sharding primitives as our Tensor Parallelism solution. But ShardedTensor only has tensor sharding support, which makes it hard to be used by users to describe other data distributions strategies like replication or replication + sharding. As a distributed system developer who wants to explore more parallelism patterns, it’s crucial to have a basic building block that describes the data distribution in a uniform way. This DistributedTensor RFC aims at solving this and provide a fundamental abstraction for distributed training.

Reviewer: Is this doc also in the public folder?
